specification/entities/data-model.md, before:

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Data Model
weight: 2
--->

# Entity Data Model

**Status**: [Development](../document-status.md)

<details>
<summary>Table of Contents</summary>

<!-- toc -->

- [Minimally Sufficient Identity](#minimally-sufficient-identity)
- [Repeatable Identity](#repeatable-identity)
- [Identifying Attributes](#identifying-attributes)
- [Resource and Entities](#resource-and-entities)
  * [Attribute Referencing Model](#attribute-referencing-model)
  * [Placement of Shared Descriptive Attributes](#placement-of-shared-descriptive-attributes)
- [Examples of Entities](#examples-of-entities)

<!-- tocstop -->

</details>

Entity represents an object of interest associated with produced telemetry:
traces, metrics, profiles, or logs.

For example, telemetry produced using an OpenTelemetry SDK is normally
associated with a `service` entity. Similarly, OpenTelemetry defines system
metrics for a `host`. The `host` is the entity we want to associate metrics with
in this case.

Entities may be also associated with produced telemetry indirectly.
For example a service that produces
telemetry is also related to a process in which the service runs, so we say that
the `service` entity is related to the `process` entity. The process normally
also runs on a host, so we say that the `process` entity is related to the
`host` entity.

> Note: Entity relationship modelling will be refined in future specification
> work.

The data model below defines a logical model for an entity (irrespective of the
physical format and encoding of how entity data is recorded).

| Field        | Type                                   | Description     |
|--------------|----------------------------------------|-----------------|
| Type         | string                                 | Defines the type of the entity. MUST not change during the lifetime of the entity. For example: "service" or "host". This field is required and MUST not be empty for valid entities. |
| Id           | map<string, attribute value>  | Attributes that identify the entity.<p>MUST not change during the lifetime of the entity. The Id must contain at least one attribute.<p>Follows OpenTelemetry [attribute definition](../common/README.md#attribute). SHOULD follow OpenTelemetry [semantic conventions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions) for attributes. |
| Description  | map<string, attribute value>                       | Descriptive (non-identifying) attributes of the entity.<p>MAY change over the lifetime of the entity. MAY be empty. These attributes are not part of entity's identity.<p>Follows OpenTelemetry [attribute definition](../common/README.md#attribute). SHOULD follow OpenTelemetry [semantic conventions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/README.md) for attributes. |

## Minimally Sufficient Identity

Commonly, a number of attributes of an entity are readily available for the telemetry
producer to compose an Id from. Of the available attributes the entity Id should
include the minimal set of attributes that is sufficient for uniquely identifying
that entity. For example a Process on a host can be uniquely identified by
(`process.pid`,`process.start_time`) attributes. Adding for example `process.executable.name` attribute to the Id is unnecessary and violates the
Minimally Sufficient Identity rule.

## Repeatable Identity

The identifying attributes for entity SHOULD be values that can be repeatably
obtained by observers of that entity. For example, a `process` entity SHOULD
have the same identity (and be recognized as the same process), regardless of whether
the identity was generated from the process itself, e.g. via SDK, or by an
OpenTelemetry Collector running on the same host, or by some other system
describing the process.

> Aside: There are many ways to accomplish repeatable identifying attributes
> across multiple observers. While many successful systems rely on pushing down
> identity from a central registry or knowledge store, OpenTelemetry must
> support all possible scenarios.

## Identifying Attributes

OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions MUST define a set of identifying attribute
keys for every defined entity type.

Names of the identifying attributes SHOULD use the entity type as a prefix to avoid
collisions with other entity types. For example, the `k8s.node` entity uses
`k8s.node.uid` as an identifying attribute.

When an entity can be emitted by multiple observers, the following rules apply:

* Two independent observers that report the same entity MUST be able to
  supply identical values for all identifying attributes.

* If an observer cannot reliably obtain one or more identifying attributes, it
  MUST NOT emit telemetry using that entity type. Instead, it SHOULD:
  1. delegate to the observer that _can_ supply the full set and treat that
     observer as the _source of truth_, or
  2. emit a _different_ entity type with a set of identifying attributes it
     can populate reliably.

This ensures that entity identity is consistent and unambiguous across
observers.

## Resource and Entities

OpenTelemetry signals (metrics, logs, traces, and profiles) support attaching
one or more entities each representing a specific infrastructure or runtime
component such as a `k8s.cluster`, `k8s.node`, `host`, or `container`.

Previously, the Resource data model relied on flattened attributes per signal.
With Entities, telemetry can represent multiple distinct but related components
within the same signal, each with its own identity and extra metadata. Entities
leverage the same pool of attributes as the Resource model. This allows for more
efficient encoding and transmission of the data, as well as backward
compatibility with existing Resource attributes.

### Attribute Referencing Model

Entities can be defined in the `resource` section of a telemetry signal. Their
identifying and descriptive attributes reference shared attributes defined in
the Resource. For example, in OTLP, entities do not carry their own key-value
pairs directly. Instead, they reference keys in `resource.attributes` to remain
backward compatible with OTLP 1.x.

This approach is designed to support attribute flattening, where attributes are
not tied to a specific structure but can be flexibly referenced across different
entities. The model provides:

- A way for entities to be identified and described with shared attributes.
- The ability to avoid data duplication and inconsistencies.
- A more efficient representation for encoding and transmission.

### Placement of Shared Descriptive Attributes

Attribute flattening allows multiple entities to reference the same attribute key,
but with different values across the entities. In such situations, the following
rule applies:

If multiple entities share the same descriptive attribute key with potentially
conflicting values, the attribute MUST logically belong to **only one** of them.
All others SHOULD NOT reference it. The attribute MUST be referenced by the
**most specific** entity, the one closest in the topology graph to the entity
associated with the telemetry signal.

**Example:**  

If a signal includes both `k8s.cluster` and `k8s.node` entities with
the `cloud.availability_zone` descriptive attribute, which may have
different values, then **only** the `k8s.node` entity can reference this key
— as it is the more specific entity.

Other entities (e.g., `k8s.cluster`) can report this attribute in a separate
telemetry channel (e.g., entity events) where full ownership context is known.

## Examples of Entities

_This section is non-normative and is present only for the purposes of
demonstrating the data model._

Here are examples of entities, the typical identifying attributes they
have and some examples of descriptive attributes that may be
associated with the entity.

_Note: These examples MAY diverge from semantic conventions._

<table>
   <tr>
    <td><strong>Entity</strong>
    </td>
    <td><strong>Entity Type</strong>
    </td>
    <td><strong>Identifying Attributes</strong>
    </td>
    <td><strong>Descriptive Attributes</strong>
    </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>Container
    </td>
    <td><pre>container</pre>
    </td>
    <td>container.id
    </td>
    <td>container.image.id<br/>
        container.image.name<br/>
        container.image.tag.{key}<br/>
        container.label.{key}<br/>
        container.name<br/>
        container.runtime<br/>
        oci.manifest.digest<br/>
        container.command<br/>
    </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>Host
    </td>
    <td><pre>host</pre>
    </td>
    <td>host.id
    </td>
    <td>host.arch<br/>
        host.name<br/>
        host.type<br/>
        host.image.id<br/>
        host.image.name<br/>
        host.image.version<br/>
        host.type
    </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>Kubernetes Node
    </td>
    <td><pre>k8s.node</pre>
    </td>
    <td>k8s.node.uid
    </td>
    <td>k8s.node.name
    </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>Kubernetes Pod
    </td>
    <td><pre>k8s.pod</pre>
    </td>
    <td>k8s.pod.uid
    </td>
    <td>k8s.pod.name<br/>
        k8s.pod.label.{key}<br/>
        k8s.pod.annotation.{key}<br/>
    </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>Service Instance
    </td>
    <td><pre>service.instance</pre>
    </td>
    <td>service.instance.id<br/>
        service.name<br/>
        service.namesapce
    </td>
    <td>service.version
    </td>
   </tr>
</table>

Commit message:

[entities] Update terminology for entity attributes
Update terminology in specification/entities/data-model.md. Replace "Identifying Attributes" with "Entity Identity"  and "Descriptive Attributes" with "Description Attributes".

Related to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4700

specification/entities/data-model.md, after:

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Data Model
weight: 2
--->

# Entity Data Model

**Status**: [Development](../document-status.md)

<details>
<summary>Table of Contents</summary>

<!-- toc -->

- [Minimally Sufficient Identity](#minimally-sufficient-identity)
- [Repeatable Identity](#repeatable-identity)
- [Attributes of Entity Identity](#attributes-of-entity-identity)
- [Resource and Entities](#resource-and-entities)
  * [Attribute Referencing Model](#attribute-referencing-model)
  * [Placement of Shared Attributes of Entity Description](#placement-of-shared-attributes-of-entity-description)
- [Examples of Entities](#examples-of-entities)

<!-- tocstop -->

</details>

Entity represents an object of interest associated with produced telemetry:
traces, metrics, profiles, or logs.

For example, telemetry produced using an OpenTelemetry SDK is normally
associated with a `service` entity. Similarly, OpenTelemetry defines system
metrics for a `host`. The `host` is the entity we want to associate metrics with
in this case.

Entities may be also associated with produced telemetry indirectly.
For example a service that produces
telemetry is also related to a process in which the service runs, so we say that
the `service` entity is related to the `process` entity. The process normally
also runs on a host, so we say that the `process` entity is related to the
`host` entity.

> Note: Entity relationship modelling will be refined in future specification
> work.

The data model below defines a logical model for an entity (irrespective of the
physical format and encoding of how entity data is recorded).

| Field        | Type                                   | Description     |
|--------------|----------------------------------------|-----------------|
| Type         | string                                 | Defines the type of the entity. MUST not change during the lifetime of the entity. For example: "service" or "host". This field is required and MUST not be empty for valid entities. |
| Id           | map<string, attribute value>           | Attributes of entity identity.<p>MUST not change during the lifetime of the entity. The Id must contain at least one attribute.<p>Follows OpenTelemetry [Standard attribute definition](../common/README.md#standard-attribute). SHOULD follow OpenTelemetry [semantic conventions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions) for attributes. |
| Description  | map<string, attribute value>           | Attributes of entity description.<p>MAY change over the lifetime of the entity. MAY be empty. These attributes are not part of entity's identity.<p>Follows [any](../logs/data-model.md#type-any) value definition in the OpenTelemetry spec. Arbitrary deep nesting of values for arrays and maps is allowed.<p>SHOULD follow OpenTelemetry [semantic conventions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/README.md) for attributes. |

## Minimally Sufficient Identity

Commonly, a number of attributes of an entity are readily available for the telemetry
producer to compose an Id from. Of the available attributes the entity Id should
include the minimal set of attributes that is sufficient for uniquely identifying
that entity. For example a Process on a host can be uniquely identified by
(`process.pid`,`process.start_time`) attributes. Adding for example `process.executable.name` attribute to the Id is unnecessary and violates the
Minimally Sufficient Identity rule.

## Repeatable Identity

The attributes of entity identity SHOULD be values that can be repeatably
obtained by observers of that entity. For example, a `process` entity SHOULD
have the same identity (and be recognized as the same process), regardless of whether
the identity was generated from the process itself, e.g. via SDK, or by an
OpenTelemetry Collector running on the same host, or by some other system
describing the process.

> Aside: There are many ways to accomplish repeatable attributes of entity identity
> across multiple observers. While many successful systems rely on pushing down
> identity from a central registry or knowledge store, OpenTelemetry must
> support all possible scenarios.

## Attributes of Entity Identity

OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions MUST define a set of identity attribute
keys for every defined entity type.

Names of the identity attributes SHOULD use the entity type as a prefix to avoid
collisions with other entity types. For example, the `k8s.node` entity uses
`k8s.node.uid` as an identity attribute.

When an entity can be emitted by multiple observers, the following rules apply:

* Two independent observers that report the same entity MUST be able to
  supply identical values for all identity attributes.

* If an observer cannot reliably obtain one or more identity attributes, it
  MUST NOT emit telemetry using that entity type. Instead, it SHOULD:
  1. delegate to the observer that _can_ supply the full set and treat that
     observer as the _source of truth_, or
  2. emit a _different_ entity type with a set of identity attributes it
     can populate reliably.

This ensures that entity identity is consistent and unambiguous across
observers.

## Resource and Entities

OpenTelemetry signals (metrics, logs, traces, and profiles) support attaching
one or more entities each representing a specific infrastructure or runtime
component such as a `k8s.cluster`, `k8s.node`, `host`, or `container`.

Previously, the Resource data model relied on flattened attributes per signal.
With Entities, telemetry can represent multiple distinct but related components
within the same signal, each with its own identity and extra metadata. Entities
leverage the same pool of attributes as the Resource model. This allows for more
efficient encoding and transmission of the data, as well as backward
compatibility with existing Resource attributes.

### Attribute Referencing Model

Entities can be defined in the `resource` section of a telemetry signal. Attributes
of their identity and description reference shared attributes defined in
the Resource. For example, in OTLP, entities do not carry their own key-value
pairs directly. Instead, they reference keys in `resource.attributes` to remain
backward compatible with OTLP 1.x.

This approach is designed to support attribute flattening, where attributes are
not tied to a specific structure but can be flexibly referenced across different
entities. The model provides:

- A way for entities to be identified and described with shared attributes.
- The ability to avoid data duplication and inconsistencies.
- A more efficient representation for encoding and transmission.

### Placement of Shared Attributes of Entity Description

Attribute flattening allows multiple entities to reference the same attribute key,
but with different values across the entities. In such situations, the following
rule applies:

If multiple entities share the same description attribute key with potentially
conflicting values, the attribute MUST logically belong to **only one** of them.
All others SHOULD NOT reference it. The attribute MUST be referenced by the
**most specific** entity, the one closest in the topology graph to the entity
associated with the telemetry signal.

**Example:**  

If a signal includes both `k8s.cluster` and `k8s.node` entities with
the `cloud.availability_zone` description attribute, which may have
different values, then **only** the `k8s.node` entity can reference this key
— as it is the more specific entity.

Other entities (e.g., `k8s.cluster`) can report this attribute in a separate
telemetry channel (e.g., entity events) where full ownership context is known.

## Examples of Entities

_This section is non-normative and is present only for the purposes of
demonstrating the data model._

Here are examples of entities, the typical identity attributes they
have and some examples of description attributes that may be
associated with the entity.

_Note: These examples MAY diverge from semantic conventions._

<table>
   <tr>
    <td><strong>Entity</strong>
    </td>
    <td><strong>Entity Type</strong>
    </td>
    <td><strong>Identity Attributes</strong>
    </td>
    <td><strong>Description Attributes</strong>
    </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>Container
    </td>
    <td><pre>container</pre>
    </td>
    <td>container.id
    </td>
    <td>container.image.id<br/>
        container.image.name<br/>
        container.image.tag.{key}<br/>
        container.label.{key}<br/>
        container.name<br/>
        container.runtime<br/>
        oci.manifest.digest<br/>
        container.command<br/>
    </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>Host
    </td>
    <td><pre>host</pre>
    </td>
    <td>host.id
    </td>
    <td>host.arch<br/>
        host.name<br/>
        host.type<br/>
        host.image.id<br/>
        host.image.name<br/>
        host.image.version<br/>
        host.type
    </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>Kubernetes Node
    </td>
    <td><pre>k8s.node</pre>
    </td>
    <td>k8s.node.uid
    </td>
    <td>k8s.node.name
    </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>Kubernetes Pod
    </td>
    <td><pre>k8s.pod</pre>
    </td>
    <td>k8s.pod.uid
    </td>
    <td>k8s.pod.name<br/>
        k8s.pod.label.{key}<br/>
        k8s.pod.annotation.{key}<br/>
    </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>Service Instance
    </td>
    <td><pre>service.instance</pre>
    </td>
    <td>service.instance.id<br/>
        service.name<br/>
        service.namesapce
    </td>
    <td>service.version
    </td>
   </tr>
</table>
