specification/document-status.md, before:

# Definitions of Document Statuses

Specification documents (files) may explicitly define a "Status", typically
shown immediately after the document title. When present, the "Status" applies
to the individual document only and not to the entire specification or any other
documents. The following table describes what the statuses mean.

## Lifecycle status

The support guarantees and allowed changes are governed by the lifecycle of the document.Lifecycle stages are defined in the [Versioning and Stability](versioning-and-stability.md) document.

|Status              |Explanation|
|--------------------|-----------|
|No explicit "Status"|Equivalent to Experimental.|
|Experimental        |Breaking changes are allowed.|
|Stable              |Breaking changes are no longer allowed. See [stability guarantees](versioning-and-stability.md#stable) for details.|
|Deprecated          |Changes are no longer allowed, except for editorial changes.|

## Feature freeze

In addition to the statuses above, documents may be marked as `Feature-freeze`. These documents are not currently accepting new feature requests, to allow the Technical Committee time to focus on other areas of the specification. Editorial changes are still accepted. Changes that address production issues with existing features are still accepted.

Feature freeze is separate from a lifecycle status. The lifecycle represents the support requirements for the document, feature freeze only indicates the current focus of the specification community. The feature freeze label may be applied to a document at any lifecycle stage. By definition, deprecated documents have a feature freeze in place.

## Mixed

Some documents have individual sections with different statuses. These documents are marked with the status `Mixed` at the top, for clarity.

Commit message:

Capitalize Development and avoid in- prefix where possible

specification/document-status.md, after:

# Definitions of Document Statuses

Specification documents (files) may explicitly define a "Status", typically
shown immediately after the document title. When present, the "Status" applies
to the individual document only and not to the entire specification or any other
documents. The following table describes what the statuses mean.

## Lifecycle status

The support guarantees and allowed changes are governed by the lifecycle of the document.Lifecycle stages are defined in the [Versioning and Stability](versioning-and-stability.md) document.

|Status              |Explanation|
|--------------------|-----------|
|No explicit "Status"|Equivalent to Development.|
|Development        |Breaking changes are allowed.|
|Stable              |Breaking changes are no longer allowed. See [stability guarantees](versioning-and-stability.md#stable) for details.|
|Deprecated          |Changes are no longer allowed, except for editorial changes.|

The specification follows
[OTEP 0232](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/blob/main/text/0232-maturity-of-otel.md#explanation)
maturity level definitions.

## Feature freeze

In addition to the statuses above, documents may be marked as `Feature-freeze`. These documents are not currently accepting new feature requests, to allow the Technical Committee time to focus on other areas of the specification. Editorial changes are still accepted. Changes that address production issues with existing features are still accepted.

Feature freeze is separate from a lifecycle status. The lifecycle represents the support requirements for the document, feature freeze only indicates the current focus of the specification community. The feature freeze label may be applied to a document at any lifecycle stage. By definition, deprecated documents have a feature freeze in place.

## Mixed

Some documents have individual sections with different statuses. These documents are marked with the status `Mixed` at the top, for clarity.
