specification/protocol/file-exporter.md, before:

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: File Exporter
--->

# OpenTelemetry Protocol File Exporter

**Status**: [Experimental](../../specification/document-status.md)

This document provides a placeholder for specifying an OTLP exporter capable of
exporting to either a file or stdout.

Currently, it only describes the serialization of OpenTelemetry data to the OTLP JSON format.

## Table of Contents

- [JSON File serialization](#json-file-serialization)
  - [File storage requirements](#file-storage-requirements)
    - [JSON lines file](#json-lines-file)
    - [Streaming appending](#streaming-appending)
  - [Telemetry data requirements](#telemetry-data-requirements)
  - [Examples](#examples)

## JSON File serialization

This document describes the serialization of OpenTelemetry data as JSON objects that can be stored in files.

### File storage requirements

#### JSON lines file

This file is a JSON lines file (jsonlines.org), and therefore follows those requirements:

* UTF-8 encoding
* Each line is a valid JSON value
* The line separator is `\n`
* The preferred file extension is `jsonl`.

#### Streaming appending

There is no guarantee that the data in the file is ordered.

There is no guarantee in particular that timestamps will be monotonically increasing.

### Telemetry data requirements

This defines the first version of the serialization scheme.

The data must be encoded according to the format specified in the
[OTLP JSON Encoding](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/docs/specification.md#json-protobuf-encoding).

Only top-level objects, `TracesData`, `MetricsData`, and `LogsData` are supported.

Files must contain exactly one type of data: traces, metrics, or logs.

### Examples

This is an example showing traces:

```json lines
{"resourceSpans":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeSpans":[{"scope":{},"spans":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationA","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","droppedAttributesCount":1,"events":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000123","name":"event-with-attr","attributes":[{"key":"span-event-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-event-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":2},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000123","name":"event","droppedAttributesCount":2}],"droppedEventsCount":1,"status":{"message":"status-cancelled","code":2}},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationB","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","links":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","attributes":[{"key":"span-link-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-link-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":4},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","droppedAttributesCount":1}],"droppedLinksCount":3,"status":{}}]}]}]}
{"resourceSpans":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeSpans":[{"scope":{},"spans":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationA","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","droppedAttributesCount":1,"events":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000424","name":"event-with-attr","attributes":[{"key":"span-event-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-event-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":2},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000424","name":"event","droppedAttributesCount":2}],"droppedEventsCount":1,"status":{"message":"status-cancelled","code":2}},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationB","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000343","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000001089","links":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","attributes":[{"key":"span-link-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-link-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":3},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","droppedAttributesCount":4}],"droppedLinksCount":2,"status":{}}]}]}]}
{"resourceSpans":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeSpans":[{"scope":{},"spans":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationA","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","droppedAttributesCount":1,"events":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000826","name":"event-with-attr","attributes":[{"key":"span-event-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-event-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":2},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000826","name":"event","droppedAttributesCount":2}],"droppedEventsCount":1,"status":{"message":"status-cancelled","code":2}},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationB","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000200521","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000004789","links":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","attributes":[{"key":"span-link-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-link-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":5},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","droppedAttributesCount":2}],"droppedLinksCount":3,"status":{}}]}]}]}
{"resourceSpans":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeSpans":[{"scope":{},"spans":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationA","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","droppedAttributesCount":1,"events":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000010925","name":"event-with-attr","attributes":[{"key":"span-event-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-event-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":2},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000010925","name":"event","droppedAttributesCount":2}],"droppedEventsCount":1,"status":{"message":"status-cancelled","code":2}},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationB","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000011821","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000012924","links":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","attributes":[{"key":"span-link-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-link-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":2},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","droppedAttributesCount":2}],"droppedLinksCount":5,"status":{}}]}]}]}
```

This is an example showing metrics:

```json lines
{"resourceMetrics":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeMetrics":[{"scope":{},"metrics":[{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","asInt":"123"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}},{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","asInt":"123"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}}]}]}]}
{"resourceMetrics":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeMetrics":[{"scope":{},"metrics":[{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","asInt":"120"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}},{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","asInt":"123"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}}]}]}]}
{"resourceMetrics":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeMetrics":[{"scope":{},"metrics":[{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000002346","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000002346","asInt":"121"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000002346","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000002346","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}},{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000002346","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000002346","asInt":"123"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}}]}]}]}
{"resourceMetrics":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeMetrics":[{"scope":{},"metrics":[{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000007891","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000007891","asInt":"125"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000007891","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}},{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000007891","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000007891","asInt":"123"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000007891","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}}]}]}]}
```

This is an example showing logs:

```json lines
{"resourceLogs":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeLogs":[{"scope":{},"logRecords":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"This is a log message"},"attributes":[{"key":"app","value":{"stringValue":"server"}},{"key":"instance_num","value":{"intValue":"1"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"08040201000000000000000000000000","spanId":"0102040800000000"},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"something happened"},"attributes":[{"key":"customer","value":{"stringValue":"acme"}},{"key":"env","value":{"stringValue":"dev"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"","spanId":""}]}]}]}
{"resourceLogs":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeLogs":[{"scope":{},"logRecords":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000001233","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"This is a log message"},"attributes":[{"key":"app","value":{"stringValue":"server"}},{"key":"instance_num","value":{"intValue":"1"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"08040201000000000000000000000000","spanId":"0102040800000000"},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"something happened"},"attributes":[{"key":"customer","value":{"stringValue":"acme"}},{"key":"env","value":{"stringValue":"dev"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"","spanId":""}]}]}]}
{"resourceLogs":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeLogs":[{"scope":{},"logRecords":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000005443","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"This is a log message"},"attributes":[{"key":"app","value":{"stringValue":"server"}},{"key":"instance_num","value":{"intValue":"1"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"08040201000000000000000000000000","spanId":"0102040800000000"},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"something happened"},"attributes":[{"key":"customer","value":{"stringValue":"acme"}},{"key":"env","value":{"stringValue":"dev"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"","spanId":""}]}]}]}
{"resourceLogs":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeLogs":[{"scope":{},"logRecords":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000009875","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"This is a log message"},"attributes":[{"key":"app","value":{"stringValue":"server"}},{"key":"instance_num","value":{"intValue":"1"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"08040201000000000000000000000000","spanId":"0102040800000000"},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"something happened"},"attributes":[{"key":"customer","value":{"stringValue":"acme"}},{"key":"env","value":{"stringValue":"dev"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"","spanId":""}]}]}]}
```

Commit message:

[editorial] Inline Hugo front matter

specification/protocol/file-exporter.md, after:

---
# Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: File Exporter
---

# OpenTelemetry Protocol File Exporter

**Status**: [Experimental](../../specification/document-status.md)

This document provides a placeholder for specifying an OTLP exporter capable of
exporting to either a file or stdout.

Currently, it only describes the serialization of OpenTelemetry data to the OTLP JSON format.

## Table of Contents

- [JSON File serialization](#json-file-serialization)
  - [File storage requirements](#file-storage-requirements)
    - [JSON lines file](#json-lines-file)
    - [Streaming appending](#streaming-appending)
  - [Telemetry data requirements](#telemetry-data-requirements)
  - [Examples](#examples)

## JSON File serialization

This document describes the serialization of OpenTelemetry data as JSON objects that can be stored in files.

### File storage requirements

#### JSON lines file

This file is a JSON lines file (jsonlines.org), and therefore follows those requirements:

* UTF-8 encoding
* Each line is a valid JSON value
* The line separator is `\n`
* The preferred file extension is `jsonl`.

#### Streaming appending

There is no guarantee that the data in the file is ordered.

There is no guarantee in particular that timestamps will be monotonically increasing.

### Telemetry data requirements

This defines the first version of the serialization scheme.

The data must be encoded according to the format specified in the
[OTLP JSON Encoding](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/docs/specification.md#json-protobuf-encoding).

Only top-level objects, `TracesData`, `MetricsData`, and `LogsData` are supported.

Files must contain exactly one type of data: traces, metrics, or logs.

### Examples

This is an example showing traces:

```json lines
{"resourceSpans":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeSpans":[{"scope":{},"spans":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationA","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","droppedAttributesCount":1,"events":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000123","name":"event-with-attr","attributes":[{"key":"span-event-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-event-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":2},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000123","name":"event","droppedAttributesCount":2}],"droppedEventsCount":1,"status":{"message":"status-cancelled","code":2}},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationB","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","links":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","attributes":[{"key":"span-link-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-link-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":4},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","droppedAttributesCount":1}],"droppedLinksCount":3,"status":{}}]}]}]}
{"resourceSpans":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeSpans":[{"scope":{},"spans":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationA","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","droppedAttributesCount":1,"events":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000424","name":"event-with-attr","attributes":[{"key":"span-event-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-event-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":2},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000424","name":"event","droppedAttributesCount":2}],"droppedEventsCount":1,"status":{"message":"status-cancelled","code":2}},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationB","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000343","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000001089","links":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","attributes":[{"key":"span-link-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-link-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":3},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","droppedAttributesCount":4}],"droppedLinksCount":2,"status":{}}]}]}]}
{"resourceSpans":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeSpans":[{"scope":{},"spans":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationA","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","droppedAttributesCount":1,"events":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000826","name":"event-with-attr","attributes":[{"key":"span-event-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-event-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":2},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000826","name":"event","droppedAttributesCount":2}],"droppedEventsCount":1,"status":{"message":"status-cancelled","code":2}},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationB","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000200521","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000004789","links":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","attributes":[{"key":"span-link-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-link-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":5},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","droppedAttributesCount":2}],"droppedLinksCount":3,"status":{}}]}]}]}
{"resourceSpans":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeSpans":[{"scope":{},"spans":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationA","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","droppedAttributesCount":1,"events":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000010925","name":"event-with-attr","attributes":[{"key":"span-event-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-event-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":2},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000010925","name":"event","droppedAttributesCount":2}],"droppedEventsCount":1,"status":{"message":"status-cancelled","code":2}},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","parentSpanId":"","name":"operationB","startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000011821","endTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000012924","links":[{"traceId":"","spanId":"","attributes":[{"key":"span-link-attr","value":{"stringValue":"span-link-attr-val"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":2},{"traceId":"","spanId":"","droppedAttributesCount":2}],"droppedLinksCount":5,"status":{}}]}]}]}
```

This is an example showing metrics:

```json lines
{"resourceMetrics":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeMetrics":[{"scope":{},"metrics":[{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","asInt":"123"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}},{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","asInt":"123"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}}]}]}]}
{"resourceMetrics":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeMetrics":[{"scope":{},"metrics":[{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","asInt":"120"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}},{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","asInt":"123"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000001459","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}}]}]}]}
{"resourceMetrics":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeMetrics":[{"scope":{},"metrics":[{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000002346","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000002346","asInt":"121"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000002346","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000002346","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}},{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000002346","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000002346","asInt":"123"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}}]}]}]}
{"resourceMetrics":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeMetrics":[{"scope":{},"metrics":[{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000007891","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000007891","asInt":"125"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000007891","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}},{"name":"counter-int","unit":"1","sum":{"dataPoints":[{"attributes":[{"key":"label-1","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-1"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452773000007891","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000007891","asInt":"123"},{"attributes":[{"key":"label-2","value":{"stringValue":"label-value-2"}}],"startTimeUnixNano":"1581452772000000321","timeUnixNano":"1581452773000007891","asInt":"456"}],"aggregationTemporality":2,"isMonotonic":true}}]}]}]}
```

This is an example showing logs:

```json lines
{"resourceLogs":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeLogs":[{"scope":{},"logRecords":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"This is a log message"},"attributes":[{"key":"app","value":{"stringValue":"server"}},{"key":"instance_num","value":{"intValue":"1"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"08040201000000000000000000000000","spanId":"0102040800000000"},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"something happened"},"attributes":[{"key":"customer","value":{"stringValue":"acme"}},{"key":"env","value":{"stringValue":"dev"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"","spanId":""}]}]}]}
{"resourceLogs":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeLogs":[{"scope":{},"logRecords":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000001233","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"This is a log message"},"attributes":[{"key":"app","value":{"stringValue":"server"}},{"key":"instance_num","value":{"intValue":"1"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"08040201000000000000000000000000","spanId":"0102040800000000"},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"something happened"},"attributes":[{"key":"customer","value":{"stringValue":"acme"}},{"key":"env","value":{"stringValue":"dev"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"","spanId":""}]}]}]}
{"resourceLogs":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeLogs":[{"scope":{},"logRecords":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000005443","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"This is a log message"},"attributes":[{"key":"app","value":{"stringValue":"server"}},{"key":"instance_num","value":{"intValue":"1"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"08040201000000000000000000000000","spanId":"0102040800000000"},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"something happened"},"attributes":[{"key":"customer","value":{"stringValue":"acme"}},{"key":"env","value":{"stringValue":"dev"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"","spanId":""}]}]}]}
{"resourceLogs":[{"resource":{"attributes":[{"key":"resource-attr","value":{"stringValue":"resource-attr-val-1"}}]},"scopeLogs":[{"scope":{},"logRecords":[{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000009875","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"This is a log message"},"attributes":[{"key":"app","value":{"stringValue":"server"}},{"key":"instance_num","value":{"intValue":"1"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"08040201000000000000000000000000","spanId":"0102040800000000"},{"timeUnixNano":"1581452773000000789","severityNumber":9,"severityText":"Info","body":{"stringValue":"something happened"},"attributes":[{"key":"customer","value":{"stringValue":"acme"}},{"key":"env","value":{"stringValue":"dev"}}],"droppedAttributesCount":1,"traceId":"","spanId":""}]}]}]}
```
