specification/common/README.md, before:

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Common concepts
aliases: [/docs/reference/specification/common/common]
path_base_for_github_subdir:
  from: tmp/otel/specification/common/_index.md
  to: common/README.md
--->

# Common specification concepts

**Status**: [Stable](../document-status.md)

<details>
<summary>Table of Contents</summary>

<!-- toc -->

- [Attribute](#attribute)
  * [Standard Attribute](#standard-attribute)
  * [Attribute Limits](#attribute-limits)
    + [Configurable Parameters](#configurable-parameters)
    + [Exempt Entities](#exempt-entities)
- [Attribute Collections](#attribute-collections)

<!-- tocstop -->

</details>

## Attribute

<a id="attributes"></a>

An `Attribute` is a key-value pair, which MUST have the following properties:

- The attribute key MUST be a non-`null` and non-empty string.
  - Case sensitivity of keys is preserved. Keys that differ in casing are treated as distinct keys.
- The attribute value is either:
  - A primitive type: string, boolean, double precision floating point (IEEE 754-1985) or signed 64 bit integer.
  - An array of primitive type values. The array MUST be homogeneous,
    i.e., it MUST NOT contain values of different types.

For protocols that do not natively support non-string values, non-string values SHOULD be represented as JSON-encoded strings.  For example, the expression `int64(100)` will be encoded as `100`, `float64(1.5)` will be encoded as `1.5`, and an empty array of any type will be encoded as `[]`.

Attribute values expressing a numerical value of zero, an empty string, or an
empty array are considered meaningful and MUST be stored and passed on to
processors / exporters.

Attribute values of `null` are not valid and attempting to set a `null` value is
undefined behavior.

`null` values SHOULD NOT be allowed in arrays. However, if it is impossible to
make sure that no `null` values are accepted
(e.g. in languages that do not have appropriate compile-time type checking),
`null` values within arrays MUST be preserved as-is (i.e., passed on to span
processors / exporters as `null`). If exporters do not support exporting `null`
values, they MAY replace those values by 0, `false`, or empty strings.
This is required for map/dictionary structures represented as two arrays with
indices that are kept in sync (e.g., two attributes `header_keys` and `header_values`,
both containing an array of strings to represent a mapping
`header_keys[i] -> header_values[i]`).

Attributes are equal when their keys and values are equal.

See [Attribute Naming](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/naming.md#attributes) for naming guidelines.

See [Requirement Level](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/attribute-requirement-level.md) for requirement levels guidelines.

See [this document](attribute-type-mapping.md) to find out how to map values obtained
outside OpenTelemetry into OpenTelemetry attribute values.

### Standard Attribute

Attributes are used in various places throughout the OpenTelemetry data model.
We designate the [previous attribute section](#attribute) as the standard
attribute definition, in order to facilitate more intuitive and consistent API /
SDK design.

The standard attribute definition SHOULD be used to represent attributes in data
modeling unless there is a strong justification to diverge. For example, the Log
Data Model has an extended [attributes](../logs/data-model.md#field-attributes)
definition allowing values of [type `Any`](../logs/data-model.md#type-any). This
reflects that LogRecord attributes are expected to model data produced from
external log APIs, which do not necessarily have the same value type
restrictions as the standard attribute definition.

Note: Extending the set of standard attribute value types is a breaking change.
This was decided after extensive debate, with arguments as follows:

* Limiting the types of attribute values to a set which has proved sufficient
  during several years of OpenTelemetry's development is a useful guardrail for
  design. In taking additional value types off the table, we narrow the solution
  space and have more productive design conversations.
* Upon proposing to extend support for complex value types, we received significant
  pushback. Limiting attribute value types to primitives and arrays of primitives
  simplifies data consumers' efforts to create search indexes and perform statistical
  analysis.
* To address concerns over restricting standard attributes to primitive types, it was
  called out that complex types can be encoded as existing primitive types, such as
  representing datetime as a string or 64 bit integer.

### Attribute Limits

Execution of erroneous code can result in unintended attributes. If there are no
limits placed on attributes, they can quickly exhaust available memory, resulting
in crashes that are difficult to recover from safely.

By default an SDK SHOULD apply truncation as per the list of
[configurable parameters](#configurable-parameters) below.

If an SDK provides a way to:

- set an attribute value length limit such that for each
  attribute value:
  - if it is a string, if it exceeds that limit (counting any character in it as
    1), SDKs MUST truncate that value, so that its length is at most equal
    to the limit,
  - if it is an array of strings, then apply the above rule to each of the
    values separately,
  - otherwise a value MUST NOT be truncated;
- set a limit of unique attribute keys such that:
  - for each unique attribute key, addition of which would result in exceeding
    the limit, SDK MUST discard that key/value pair.

There MAY be a log emitted to indicate to the user that an attribute was
truncated or discarded. To prevent excessive logging, the log MUST NOT be
emitted more than once per record on which an attribute is set.

If the SDK implements the limits above, it MUST provide a way to change these
limits programmatically. Names of the configuration options SHOULD be the same as
in the list below.

An SDK MAY implement model-specific limits, for example
`SpanAttributeCountLimit` or `LogRecordAttributeCountLimit`. If both a general
and a model-specific limit are implemented, then the SDK MUST first attempt to
use the model-specific limit, if it isn't set, then the SDK MUST attempt to use
the general limit. If neither are defined, then the SDK MUST try to use the
model-specific limit default value, followed by the global limit default value.

#### Configurable Parameters

* `AttributeCountLimit` (Default=128) - Maximum allowed attribute count per record;
* `AttributeValueLengthLimit` (Default=Infinity) - Maximum allowed attribute value length;

#### Exempt Entities

Resource attributes SHOULD be exempt from the limits described above as resources
are not susceptible to the scenarios (auto-instrumentation) that result in
excessive attributes count or size. Resources are also sent only once per batch
instead of per span so it is relatively cheaper to have more/larger attributes
on them. Resources are also immutable by design and they are generally passed
down to TracerProvider along with limits. This makes it awkward to implement
attribute limits for Resources.

Attributes, which belong to Metrics, are exempt from the limits described above
at this time, as discussed in
[Metrics Attribute Limits](../metrics/sdk.md#attribute-limits).

## Attribute Collections

[Resources](../resource/sdk.md),
[Instrumentation Scopes](../glossary.md#instrumentation-scope),
[Metric points](../metrics/data-model.md#metric-points),
[Spans](../trace/api.md#set-attributes), Span
[Events](../trace/api.md#add-events), Span
[Links](../trace/api.md#link) and
[Log Records](../logs/data-model.md) may contain a collection of attributes. The
keys in each such collection are unique, i.e. there MUST NOT exist more than one
key-value pair with the same key. The enforcement of uniqueness may be performed
in a variety of ways as it best fits the limitations of the particular
implementation.

Normally for the telemetry generated using OpenTelemetry SDKs the attribute
key-value pairs are set via an API that either accepts a single key-value pair
or a collection of key-value pairs. Setting an attribute with the same key as an
existing attribute SHOULD overwrite the existing attribute's value. See for
example Span's [SetAttribute](../trace/api.md#set-attributes) API.

A typical implementation of [SetAttribute](../trace/api.md#set-attributes) API
will enforce the uniqueness by overwriting any existing attribute values pending
to be exported, so that when the Span is eventually exported the exporters see
only unique attributes. The OTLP format in particular requires that exported
Resources, Spans, Metric data points and Log Records contain only unique
attributes.

Some other implementations may use a streaming approach where every
[SetAttribute](../trace/api.md#set-attributes) API call immediately results in
that individual attribute value being exported using a streaming wire protocol.
In such cases the enforcement of uniqueness will likely be the responsibility of
the recipient of this data.

Collection of attributes are equal when they contain the same attributes,
irrespective of the order in which those elements appear
(unordered collection equality).

Commit message:

Have InstrumentationScope use normative language.
This also means moving its definition from glossary
into the actual specification (common/).

specification/common/README.md, after:

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Common concepts
aliases: [/docs/reference/specification/common/common]
path_base_for_github_subdir:
  from: tmp/otel/specification/common/_index.md
  to: common/README.md
--->

# Common specification concepts

**Status**: [Stable](../document-status.md)

<details>
<summary>Table of Contents</summary>

<!-- toc -->

- [Instrumentation Scope](#instrumentation-scope)
- [Attribute](#attribute)
  * [Standard Attribute](#standard-attribute)
  * [Attribute Limits](#attribute-limits)
    + [Configurable Parameters](#configurable-parameters)
    + [Exempt Entities](#exempt-entities)
- [Attribute Collections](#attribute-collections)

<!-- tocstop -->

</details>

## Instrumentation Scope

A logical unit of the application code with which the emitted telemetry can be
associated. It is typically the developer's choice to decide what denotes a
reasonable instrumentation scope. The most common approach is to use the
[instrumentation library](glossary.md#instrumentation-library) as the scope,
however other scopes are also common, e.g. a module, a package, a class or
a plugin name can be chosen as the instrumentation scope.

The instrumentation scope is defined by the
(name,version,schema_url,attributes) tuple where version, schema_url, and
attributes are optional. This tuple MUST uniquely identify the logical unit of the
code that emits the telemetry. A typical approach to ensure uniqueness is to
use the fully qualified name of the emitting code (e.g. fully qualified library
name or fully qualified class name).

The instrumentation scope MUST be used to obtain a
[Tracer, Meter, or Logger](glossary.md#tracer-name--meter-name--logger-name).

The instrumentation scope's optional Schema URL identifies the [Telemetry
Schema](schemas/README.md) that the instrumentation's emitted
telemetry conforms to.

The instrumentation scope's optional attributes provide additional information about
the scope. For example for a scope that specifies an
instrumentation library an additional attribute may be recorded to denote the URL of the
repository URL the library's source code is stored.

## Attribute

<a id="attributes"></a>

An `Attribute` is a key-value pair, which MUST have the following properties:

- The attribute key MUST be a non-`null` and non-empty string.
  - Case sensitivity of keys is preserved. Keys that differ in casing are treated as distinct keys.
- The attribute value is either:
  - A primitive type: string, boolean, double precision floating point (IEEE 754-1985) or signed 64 bit integer.
  - An array of primitive type values. The array MUST be homogeneous,
    i.e., it MUST NOT contain values of different types.

For protocols that do not natively support non-string values, non-string values SHOULD be represented as JSON-encoded strings.  For example, the expression `int64(100)` will be encoded as `100`, `float64(1.5)` will be encoded as `1.5`, and an empty array of any type will be encoded as `[]`.

Attribute values expressing a numerical value of zero, an empty string, or an
empty array are considered meaningful and MUST be stored and passed on to
processors / exporters.

Attribute values of `null` are not valid and attempting to set a `null` value is
undefined behavior.

`null` values SHOULD NOT be allowed in arrays. However, if it is impossible to
make sure that no `null` values are accepted
(e.g. in languages that do not have appropriate compile-time type checking),
`null` values within arrays MUST be preserved as-is (i.e., passed on to span
processors / exporters as `null`). If exporters do not support exporting `null`
values, they MAY replace those values by 0, `false`, or empty strings.
This is required for map/dictionary structures represented as two arrays with
indices that are kept in sync (e.g., two attributes `header_keys` and `header_values`,
both containing an array of strings to represent a mapping
`header_keys[i] -> header_values[i]`).

Attributes are equal when their keys and values are equal.

See [Attribute Naming](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/naming.md#attributes) for naming guidelines.

See [Requirement Level](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/attribute-requirement-level.md) for requirement levels guidelines.

See [this document](attribute-type-mapping.md) to find out how to map values obtained
outside OpenTelemetry into OpenTelemetry attribute values.

### Standard Attribute

Attributes are used in various places throughout the OpenTelemetry data model.
We designate the [previous attribute section](#attribute) as the standard
attribute definition, in order to facilitate more intuitive and consistent API /
SDK design.

The standard attribute definition SHOULD be used to represent attributes in data
modeling unless there is a strong justification to diverge. For example, the Log
Data Model has an extended [attributes](../logs/data-model.md#field-attributes)
definition allowing values of [type `Any`](../logs/data-model.md#type-any). This
reflects that LogRecord attributes are expected to model data produced from
external log APIs, which do not necessarily have the same value type
restrictions as the standard attribute definition.

Note: Extending the set of standard attribute value types is a breaking change.
This was decided after extensive debate, with arguments as follows:

* Limiting the types of attribute values to a set which has proved sufficient
  during several years of OpenTelemetry's development is a useful guardrail for
  design. In taking additional value types off the table, we narrow the solution
  space and have more productive design conversations.
* Upon proposing to extend support for complex value types, we received significant
  pushback. Limiting attribute value types to primitives and arrays of primitives
  simplifies data consumers' efforts to create search indexes and perform statistical
  analysis.
* To address concerns over restricting standard attributes to primitive types, it was
  called out that complex types can be encoded as existing primitive types, such as
  representing datetime as a string or 64 bit integer.

### Attribute Limits

Execution of erroneous code can result in unintended attributes. If there are no
limits placed on attributes, they can quickly exhaust available memory, resulting
in crashes that are difficult to recover from safely.

By default an SDK SHOULD apply truncation as per the list of
[configurable parameters](#configurable-parameters) below.

If an SDK provides a way to:

- set an attribute value length limit such that for each
  attribute value:
  - if it is a string, if it exceeds that limit (counting any character in it as
    1), SDKs MUST truncate that value, so that its length is at most equal
    to the limit,
  - if it is an array of strings, then apply the above rule to each of the
    values separately,
  - otherwise a value MUST NOT be truncated;
- set a limit of unique attribute keys such that:
  - for each unique attribute key, addition of which would result in exceeding
    the limit, SDK MUST discard that key/value pair.

There MAY be a log emitted to indicate to the user that an attribute was
truncated or discarded. To prevent excessive logging, the log MUST NOT be
emitted more than once per record on which an attribute is set.

If the SDK implements the limits above, it MUST provide a way to change these
limits programmatically. Names of the configuration options SHOULD be the same as
in the list below.

An SDK MAY implement model-specific limits, for example
`SpanAttributeCountLimit` or `LogRecordAttributeCountLimit`. If both a general
and a model-specific limit are implemented, then the SDK MUST first attempt to
use the model-specific limit, if it isn't set, then the SDK MUST attempt to use
the general limit. If neither are defined, then the SDK MUST try to use the
model-specific limit default value, followed by the global limit default value.

#### Configurable Parameters

* `AttributeCountLimit` (Default=128) - Maximum allowed attribute count per record;
* `AttributeValueLengthLimit` (Default=Infinity) - Maximum allowed attribute value length;

#### Exempt Entities

Resource attributes SHOULD be exempt from the limits described above as resources
are not susceptible to the scenarios (auto-instrumentation) that result in
excessive attributes count or size. Resources are also sent only once per batch
instead of per span so it is relatively cheaper to have more/larger attributes
on them. Resources are also immutable by design and they are generally passed
down to TracerProvider along with limits. This makes it awkward to implement
attribute limits for Resources.

Attributes, which belong to Metrics, are exempt from the limits described above
at this time, as discussed in
[Metrics Attribute Limits](../metrics/sdk.md#attribute-limits).

## Attribute Collections

[Resources](../resource/sdk.md),
[Instrumentation Scopes](../glossary.md#instrumentation-scope),
[Metric points](../metrics/data-model.md#metric-points),
[Spans](../trace/api.md#set-attributes), Span
[Events](../trace/api.md#add-events), Span
[Links](../trace/api.md#link) and
[Log Records](../logs/data-model.md) may contain a collection of attributes. The
keys in each such collection are unique, i.e. there MUST NOT exist more than one
key-value pair with the same key. The enforcement of uniqueness may be performed
in a variety of ways as it best fits the limitations of the particular
implementation.

Normally for the telemetry generated using OpenTelemetry SDKs the attribute
key-value pairs are set via an API that either accepts a single key-value pair
or a collection of key-value pairs. Setting an attribute with the same key as an
existing attribute SHOULD overwrite the existing attribute's value. See for
example Span's [SetAttribute](../trace/api.md#set-attributes) API.

A typical implementation of [SetAttribute](../trace/api.md#set-attributes) API
will enforce the uniqueness by overwriting any existing attribute values pending
to be exported, so that when the Span is eventually exported the exporters see
only unique attributes. The OTLP format in particular requires that exported
Resources, Spans, Metric data points and Log Records contain only unique
attributes.

Some other implementations may use a streaming approach where every
[SetAttribute](../trace/api.md#set-attributes) API call immediately results in
that individual attribute value being exported using a streaming wire protocol.
In such cases the enforcement of uniqueness will likely be the responsibility of
the recipient of this data.

Collection of attributes are equal when they contain the same attributes,
irrespective of the order in which those elements appear
(unordered collection equality).
