specification/trace/tracestate-handling.md, before:

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: TraceState
--->

# TraceState Handling

**Status**: [Experimental](../document-status.md)

In alignment to the [TraceContext](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) specification, this section uses the
Augmented Backus-Naur Form (ABNF) notation of [RFC5234](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#bib-rfc5234),
including the DIGIT rule in that document.

When setting [TraceState](api.md#tracestate) values that are part of the OTel ecosystem,
they MUST all be contained in a single entry using the `ot` key, with the value being
a semicolon separated list of key-value pairs such as:

* `ot=p:8;r:62`
* `ot=foo:bar;k1:13`

The [TraceContext](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) specification defines support for multiple "tenants" each to use their own `tracestate` entry by prefixing `tenant@` to tenant-specific values in a mixed tracing environment. OpenTelemetry recognizes this syntax but does not specify an interpretation for multi-tenant `tracestate`.
The list can be formally defined as:

```
list        = list-member *( ";" list-member )
list-member = key ":" value
```

The complete list length MUST NOT exceed 256 characters, as defined by the
[TraceState value section](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#value),
and the used keys MUST be unique.

Instrumentation libraries and clients MUST NOT use this entry, and they MUST
instead use their own entry.

## Key

The key is an identifier that describes an OTel concern.
Simple examples are `p`, `ts`, or `s1`.

The key can be formally defined as:

```
key        = lcalpha *(lcalpha / DIGIT )
lcalpha    = %x61-7A ; a-z
```

Specific keys used by OTel concerns MUST be defined as part as the Specification,
and hence it is forbidden to use to use any key that has not been defined in
the Specification itself.

## Value

The value is an opaque string. Although it has no maximum allowed length,
it is recommended to use short values, as the **entire** list of key-values
MUST NOT exceed 256 characters.

The value can be formally defined as:

```
value      = *(chr)
chr        = ucalpha / lcalpha / DIGIT / "." / "_" / "-"
ucalpha    = %x41-5A ; A-Z
lcalpha    = %x61-7A ; a-z
```

## Setting values

Set values MUST be either updated or added to the `ot` entry in `TraceState`,
in order to preserve existing values belonging to other OTel concerns. For example,
if a given concern K wants to set `k1:13`:

* `ot=p:8;r:62` will become `ot=p:8;r:62;k1:13`.
* `ot=p:8;k1:7;r:62` will become `ot=p:8;r:62;k1:13`. Preserving the order is not required.

If setting a value ends up making the entire `ot` entry exceed the 256 characters limit,
SDKs are advised to abort the operation and signal the user about the error, e.g.

```go
traceState, ok := SetTraceStateValue(traceState, value)
if ok {
  // Successfully set the specified value, traceState was updated.
} else {
  // traceState was not updated.
}
```

Commit message:

[editorial] Inline Hugo front matter

specification/trace/tracestate-handling.md, after:

---
# Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: TraceState
---

# TraceState Handling

**Status**: [Experimental](../document-status.md)

In alignment to the [TraceContext](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) specification, this section uses the
Augmented Backus-Naur Form (ABNF) notation of [RFC5234](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#bib-rfc5234),
including the DIGIT rule in that document.

When setting [TraceState](api.md#tracestate) values that are part of the OTel ecosystem,
they MUST all be contained in a single entry using the `ot` key, with the value being
a semicolon separated list of key-value pairs such as:

* `ot=p:8;r:62`
* `ot=foo:bar;k1:13`

The [TraceContext](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) specification defines support for multiple "tenants" each to use their own `tracestate` entry by prefixing `tenant@` to tenant-specific values in a mixed tracing environment. OpenTelemetry recognizes this syntax but does not specify an interpretation for multi-tenant `tracestate`.
The list can be formally defined as:

```
list        = list-member *( ";" list-member )
list-member = key ":" value
```

The complete list length MUST NOT exceed 256 characters, as defined by the
[TraceState value section](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#value),
and the used keys MUST be unique.

Instrumentation libraries and clients MUST NOT use this entry, and they MUST
instead use their own entry.

## Key

The key is an identifier that describes an OTel concern.
Simple examples are `p`, `ts`, or `s1`.

The key can be formally defined as:

```
key        = lcalpha *(lcalpha / DIGIT )
lcalpha    = %x61-7A ; a-z
```

Specific keys used by OTel concerns MUST be defined as part as the Specification,
and hence it is forbidden to use to use any key that has not been defined in
the Specification itself.

## Value

The value is an opaque string. Although it has no maximum allowed length,
it is recommended to use short values, as the **entire** list of key-values
MUST NOT exceed 256 characters.

The value can be formally defined as:

```
value      = *(chr)
chr        = ucalpha / lcalpha / DIGIT / "." / "_" / "-"
ucalpha    = %x41-5A ; A-Z
lcalpha    = %x61-7A ; a-z
```

## Setting values

Set values MUST be either updated or added to the `ot` entry in `TraceState`,
in order to preserve existing values belonging to other OTel concerns. For example,
if a given concern K wants to set `k1:13`:

* `ot=p:8;r:62` will become `ot=p:8;r:62;k1:13`.
* `ot=p:8;k1:7;r:62` will become `ot=p:8;r:62;k1:13`. Preserving the order is not required.

If setting a value ends up making the entire `ot` entry exceed the 256 characters limit,
SDKs are advised to abort the operation and signal the user about the error, e.g.

```go
traceState, ok := SetTraceStateValue(traceState, value)
if ok {
  // Successfully set the specified value, traceState was updated.
} else {
  // traceState was not updated.
}
```
