oteps/4485-extending-attributes-to-support-complex-values.md, before:

# Extending attributes to support complex values

* [Glossary](#glossary)
* [Why?](#why)
  * [Why do we want complex attributes on spans?](#why-do-we-want-complex-attributes-on-spans)
  * [Why do we want to extend standard attributes?](#why-do-we-want-to-extend-standard-attributes)
  * [Why doesn't this require a major version bump?](#why-doesnt-this-require-a-major-version-bump)
* [How](#how)
  * [API](#api)
  * [SDK](#sdk)
    * [`AnyValue` implementation notes](#anyvalue-implementation-notes)
    * [Attribute limits](#attribute-limits)
  * [Exporters](#exporters)
  * [Semantic conventions](#semantic-conventions)
  * [Proto](#proto)
* [Trade-offs and mitigations](#trade-offs-and-mitigations)
  * [Backends don't support `AnyValue` attributes](#backends-dont-support-anyvalue-attributes)
  * [Arbitrary objects are dangerous](#arbitrary-objects-are-dangerous)
* [Prototypes](#prototypes)
* [Future possibilities](#future-possibilities)
  * [Configurable OTLP exporter behavior](#configurable-otlp-exporter-behavior)
  * [Additional size limits](#additional-size-limits)
* [Backend research](#backend-research)

## Glossary

In the context of this OTEP, we use the following terminology:

- **Simple attributes** are attributes with primitive types or homogeneous arrays of primitives.
  Their types are known in advance and correspond to the top-level  `string_value`,
  `bool`, `int64`, `double`, and `ArrayValue` of those types in the
  [AnyValue proto definition](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/42319f8b5bf330f7c3dd4a097384f9f6d5467450/opentelemetry/proto/common/v1/common.proto#L28-L40).
  These are currently referred to as *standard* attributes in the
  [specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.44.0/specification/common/README.md)

- **Complex attributes** include all other values supported by the `AnyValue` proto,
  such as null (empty) value, maps, heterogeneous arrays, and combinations of those with primitives.
  Byte arrays are also considered complex attributes, as they are excluded from
  the current definition of *standard* attributes.

This distinction is not intended for the spec language, but is helpful here
because the OTEP proposes including both *simple* and *complex* attributes
in the set of *standard* attributes.

## Why?

### Why do we want complex attributes on spans?

There are a number of reasons why we want to allow complex attributes on spans:

- Emerging semantic conventions, such as Generative AI and GraphQL,
  demonstrate the usefulness of including complex attributes on spans.
- Many users already add complex attributes to spans by JSON-encoding them.
  Supporting complex attributes natively enables future possibilities like
  collector transformations, better attribute truncation, and native
  storage of complex attributes in backends.
- During the span event deprecation process, we found that some people
  use span events to represent complex data on spans.
  Providing support for complex attributes on spans would offer a more natural
  way to store this data.
- During the event stabilization process, it became clear that
  [spans and events are often thought of as being conceptual
  twins](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2025/opentelemetry-logging-and-you/#how-is-this-different-from-other-signals),
  and that the choice between modeling something as a span or an event should not
  be influenced by whether complex attributes are needed.

### Why do we want to extend standard attributes?

Instead of introducing a second set of "extended" attributes that can be used on
spans and events, we propose to extend the standard attributes.

Having multiple attribute sets across the API
[creates ergonomic challenges](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4201).
While there are some mitigations (as demonstrated in
[opentelemetry-java#7123](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/pull/7123) and
[opentelemetry-go#6180](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/6180)),
extending the standard attributes provides a more seamless and user-friendly API experience.

### Why doesn't this require a major version bump?

Currently, the SDK specification has a clause that says extending
the set of standard attribute would be
[considered a breaking change](/specification/common/README.md#standard-attribute).

We believe that removing this clause and extending standard
attributes can be done gracefully across the OpenTelemetry ecosystem
without requiring a major version bump:

- Language SDKs can implement this without breaking their backwards
  compatibility guarantees (e.g., [Java's](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/main/VERSIONING.md)).
- While backends may still need to add support for complex attributes,
  this is the case with the introduction of any new OTLP feature.
  - Bumping the OTLP minor version is already the normal communication mechanism
    for this kind of change.
  - SDKs will be required to only emit complex attributes under that OTLP version
    or later.
  - Stable SDKs will be prohibited from emitting complex attributes until at
    least Oct 1, 2025.
  - A reasonably straightforward implementation option for backends is to just
    JSON serialize complex attributes and store them as strings.

## How

### API

Existing APIs that create or add attributes will be extended to support value
with type `AnyValue`.

It's RECOMMENDED to expose an `AnyValue` API for type checking, ergonomics,
and performance.

Exposing multiple `Attributes` types is NOT RECOMMENDED.

OTel API MUST support setting complex attributes on spans, logs, profiles,
descriptive entity attributes.

OTel API SHOULD NOT provide convenience methods to set complex attributes on
metrics, resources, instrumentation scope. APIs that allow to set complex attributes
on such signals (for example, providing an arbitrary attributes collection when
recording a metric), MUST document complex attributes usage limitations.

API documentation and spec language SHOULD include a language similar to this:

> Simple attributes SHOULD be used whenever possible. Instrumentations SHOULD
> assume that backends do not index individual properties of complex attributes,
> that querying or aggregating on such properties is inefficient and complicated,
> and that reporting complex attributes carries higher performance overhead.

### SDK

**The OTel SDK MUST support complex attributes on all telemetry signals.**

It includes spans, logs, and profiles where complex attributes have known use-cases as
well as metrics, resources, instrumentation scope, and entities where complex attributes
usage is currently discouraged and expected to be accidental.

Any future OTel signals SHOULD support complex attributes unless there is a
reason not to, which MUST be documented in the specification.

The OTel SDK SHOULD pass both simple and complex attributes to the processing
pipeline as `AnyValue`.
The SDK MUST support reading and modifying complex attributes during processing.

#### `AnyValue` implementation notes

`AnyValue` implementation SHOULD provide efficient hash code and deep equality check
since its possible (but not recommended) to use complex attributes as a resource,
instrumentation scope, or metric attribute where hash code and equality may be
extensively used to identify tracer/meter/logger or the time series.

Equality of `KeyValueList`s MUST be unaffected by the ordering of their `KeyValue` pairs.

#### Attribute limits

The SDK SHOULD apply [attribute limits](/specification/common/README.md#attribute-limits)
to complex attributes.

**Attribute value length limit** SHOULD be applied to all leaf string nodes in
`AnyValue` which SHOULD be truncated to the configured limit.

Leaf nodes of an `AnyValue` attribute SHOULD count toward the **attribute count limit**.
If the limit is reached, the SDK MUST drop the entire `AnyValue` attribute;
partial exports are not allowed.

> [!NOTE]
>
> We should define `AnyValue` limits even if this OTEP is not merged -
> [#4487](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4487)

### Exporters

OTLP exporter SHOULD, by default, pass `AnyValue` attributes to the endpoint.

Exporters for protocols that do not natively support complex values, such as Prometheus,
SHOULD represent complex values as JSON-encoded strings following
[attribute specification](/specification/common/README.md#attribute).

When serializing `AnyValue` attributes to JSON, it is RECOMMENDED to sort map keys
lexicographically and apply additional settings that enhance serialization stability.

### Semantic conventions

Semantic conventions will be updated with the following guidance:

- Simple attributes SHOULD be used whenever possible. Semantic conventions SHOULD
  assume that backends do not index individual properties of complex attributes,
  that querying or aggregating on such properties is inefficient and complicated,
  and that reporting complex attributes carries higher performance overhead.

- Complex attributes that are likely to be large (when serialized to a string) SHOULD
  be added as *opt-in* attributes. *Large* will be defined based on common backend
  attribute limits, typically around 4–16 KB.

- Complex attributes MUST NOT be used on metrics, resources, instrumentation scopes,
  or as identifying attributes on entities.

### Proto

OTLP uses `AnyValue` attributes on all signals, so the changes would be limited
to updating comments like [this one](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/be5d58470429d0255ffdd49491f0815a3a63d6ef/opentelemetry/proto/trace/v1/trace.proto#L209-L213)
and adding changelog record.

## Trade-offs and mitigations

### Backends don't support `AnyValue` attributes

While it should be possible to record complex data in telemetry, many backends do not
support it, which can result in individual complex attributes being dropped.

We mitigate this through:

- Introducing new APIs in the experimental parts of the OTel API which will limit
  the impact of unsupported attribute types to early adopters, while giving
  backends time to add support.

- Semantic conventions guidance that limits usage of complex attributes.

- Existing collector transformation processor that can drop, flatten, serialize,
  or truncate complex attributes using OTTL.

### Arbitrary objects are dangerous

Allowing arbitrary objects as attributes is convenient but increases the risk of
including large, sensitive, mutable, non-serializable, or otherwise problematic
data in telemetry.

It is RECOMMENDED to enforce `AnyValue` compatibility at the API level.
Users and instrumentations SHOULD define custom `AnyValue`-compatible models
to minimize misuse and reduce performance overhead.

OTel SDKs that provide convenience to convert arbitrary objects to `AnyValue`
SHOULD limit supported types to primitives, arrays, standard library collections,
named tuples, JSON objects, and similar structures following
[mapping to OTLP AnyValue](/specification/common/attribute-type-mapping.md#mapping-arbitrary-data-to-otlp-anyvalue).

Falling back to a string representation of unknown objects is RECOMMENDED to
minimize the risk of unintentional use of complex attributes.

Prior art on AnyValue conversion: [Go](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/blob/72cccd8065dcfd84b69f34d8cb6f349a547fedce/bridges/otelslog/convert.go#L20),
[.NET](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/71abd4169b4b6c672343b37c32e3337bc227ed32/src/OpenTelemetry/Logs/ILogger/OpenTelemetryLogger.cs#L134),
[Python](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python/blob/00329e07fb01d7c3e43bb513fe9be3748745c52e/opentelemetry-api/src/opentelemetry/attributes/__init__.py#L121)

## Prototypes

TODO

## Future possibilities

### Configurable OTLP exporter behavior

The OTLP exporter behavior for complex attributes can be made customizable on a per-signal
basis, allowing complex attributes to be:

- passed through (the default),
- serialized to JSON, or
- dropped

This option may be useful as a workaround for applications that don’t use a
collector and whose backend does not handle complex attribute types gracefully.

### Additional size limits

We can consider a separate set of attribute limits specifically for complex values,
including a total size limit and ability to estimate `AnyValue` object size.

## Backend research

See [the gist](https://gist.github.com/lmolkova/737ebba190b206a5d60bbc075fea538b)
for additional details.

| Backend                           | Handles complex attributes gracefully? | Comments        |
| --------------------------------- | ------------------------| ------------------------------ |
| Jaeger (OTLP)                     | :white_check_mark:      | serializes to JSON string |
| Prometheus with OTLP remote write | :white_check_mark:      | serializes to JSON string |
| Grafana Tempo (OTLP)              | :white_check_mark:      | serializes to JSON string, viewable but can't query using this attribute |
| Grafana Loki (OTLP)               | :white_check_mark:      | flattens |
| Aspire dashboard (OTLP)           | :white_check_mark:      | serializes to JSON string |
| ClickHouse (collector exporter)   | :white_check_mark:      | serializes to JSON string, can parse JSON and query |
| Honeycomb (OTLP)                  | :white_check_mark:      | flattens if less than 5 layers deep, not array or binary data, JSON string otherwise |
| New Relic (OTLP)                  | :x: (fix is on the way) | drops spans | |

Commit message:

SDK requirement matching API requirement. also exemplars

oteps/4485-extending-attributes-to-support-complex-values.md, after:

# Extending attributes to support complex values

* [Glossary](#glossary)
* [Why?](#why)
  * [Why do we want complex attributes on spans?](#why-do-we-want-complex-attributes-on-spans)
  * [Why do we want to extend standard attributes?](#why-do-we-want-to-extend-standard-attributes)
  * [Why doesn't this require a major version bump?](#why-doesnt-this-require-a-major-version-bump)
* [How](#how)
  * [API](#api)
  * [SDK](#sdk)
    * [`AnyValue` implementation notes](#anyvalue-implementation-notes)
    * [Attribute limits](#attribute-limits)
  * [Exporters](#exporters)
  * [Semantic conventions](#semantic-conventions)
  * [Proto](#proto)
* [Trade-offs and mitigations](#trade-offs-and-mitigations)
  * [Backends don't support `AnyValue` attributes](#backends-dont-support-anyvalue-attributes)
  * [Arbitrary objects are dangerous](#arbitrary-objects-are-dangerous)
* [Prototypes](#prototypes)
* [Future possibilities](#future-possibilities)
  * [Configurable OTLP exporter behavior](#configurable-otlp-exporter-behavior)
  * [Additional size limits](#additional-size-limits)
* [Backend research](#backend-research)

## Glossary

In the context of this OTEP, we use the following terminology:

- **Simple attributes** are attributes with primitive types or homogeneous arrays of primitives.
  Their types are known in advance and correspond to the top-level  `string_value`,
  `bool`, `int64`, `double`, and `ArrayValue` of those types in the
  [AnyValue proto definition](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/42319f8b5bf330f7c3dd4a097384f9f6d5467450/opentelemetry/proto/common/v1/common.proto#L28-L40).
  These are currently referred to as *standard* attributes in the
  [specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.44.0/specification/common/README.md)

- **Complex attributes** include all other values supported by the `AnyValue` proto,
  such as null (empty) value, maps, heterogeneous arrays, and combinations of those with primitives.
  Byte arrays are also considered complex attributes, as they are excluded from
  the current definition of *standard* attributes.

This distinction is not intended for the spec language, but is helpful here
because the OTEP proposes including both *simple* and *complex* attributes
in the set of *standard* attributes.

## Why?

### Why do we want complex attributes on spans?

There are a number of reasons why we want to allow complex attributes on spans:

- Emerging semantic conventions, such as Generative AI and GraphQL,
  demonstrate the usefulness of including complex attributes on spans.
- Many users already add complex attributes to spans by JSON-encoding them.
  Supporting complex attributes natively enables future possibilities like
  collector transformations, better attribute truncation, and native
  storage of complex attributes in backends.
- During the span event deprecation process, we found that some people
  use span events to represent complex data on spans.
  Providing support for complex attributes on spans would offer a more natural
  way to store this data.
- During the event stabilization process, it became clear that
  [spans and events are often thought of as being conceptual
  twins](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2025/opentelemetry-logging-and-you/#how-is-this-different-from-other-signals),
  and that the choice between modeling something as a span or an event should not
  be influenced by whether complex attributes are needed.

### Why do we want to extend standard attributes?

Instead of introducing a second set of "extended" attributes that can be used on
spans and events, we propose to extend the standard attributes.

Having multiple attribute sets across the API
[creates ergonomic challenges](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4201).
While there are some mitigations (as demonstrated in
[opentelemetry-java#7123](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/pull/7123) and
[opentelemetry-go#6180](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/6180)),
extending the standard attributes provides a more seamless and user-friendly API experience.

### Why doesn't this require a major version bump?

Currently, the SDK specification has a clause that says extending
the set of standard attribute would be
[considered a breaking change](/specification/common/README.md#standard-attribute).

We believe that removing this clause and extending standard
attributes can be done gracefully across the OpenTelemetry ecosystem
without requiring a major version bump:

- Language SDKs can implement this without breaking their backwards
  compatibility guarantees (e.g., [Java's](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/main/VERSIONING.md)).
- While backends may still need to add support for complex attributes,
  this is the case with the introduction of any new OTLP feature.
  - Bumping the OTLP minor version is already the normal communication mechanism
    for this kind of change.
  - SDKs will be required to only emit complex attributes under that OTLP version
    or later.
  - Stable SDKs will be prohibited from emitting complex attributes until at
    least Oct 1, 2025.
  - A reasonably straightforward implementation option for backends is to just
    JSON serialize complex attributes and store them as strings.

## How

### API

Existing APIs that create or add attributes will be extended to support value
with type `AnyValue`.

It's RECOMMENDED to expose an `AnyValue` API for type checking, ergonomics,
and performance.

Exposing multiple `Attributes` types is NOT RECOMMENDED.

OTel API MUST support setting complex attributes on spans, logs, profiles,
exemplars, and as descriptive entity attributes.

OTel API MAY support setting complex attributes on metrics, resources,
and instrumentation scope. OTel API SHOULD NOT provide convenience methods
to set complex attributes on these signals. APIs that allow to set complex attributes
on these signals (for example, providing an arbitrary attributes collection when
recording a metric), MUST document complex attributes usage limitations.

API documentation and spec language SHOULD include a language similar to this:

> Simple attributes SHOULD be used whenever possible. Instrumentations SHOULD
> assume that backends do not index individual properties of complex attributes,
> that querying or aggregating on such properties is inefficient and complicated,
> and that reporting complex attributes carries higher performance overhead.

### SDK

OTel SDK MUST support setting complex attributes on spans, logs, profiles,
descriptive entity attributes.

OTel SDK MAY support setting complex attributes on other telemetry signals.

The SDK MUST support reading and modifying complex attributes during processing.

#### `AnyValue` implementation notes

`AnyValue` implementation SHOULD provide efficient hash code and deep equality check
since its possible (but not recommended) to use complex attributes as a resource,
instrumentation scope, or metric attribute where hash code and equality may be
extensively used to identify tracer/meter/logger or the time series.

Equality of `KeyValueList`s MUST be unaffected by the ordering of their `KeyValue` pairs.

#### Attribute limits

The SDK SHOULD apply [attribute limits](/specification/common/README.md#attribute-limits)
to complex attributes.

**Attribute value length limit** SHOULD be applied to all leaf string nodes in
`AnyValue` which SHOULD be truncated to the configured limit.

Leaf nodes of an `AnyValue` attribute SHOULD count toward the **attribute count limit**.
If the limit is reached, the SDK MUST drop the entire `AnyValue` attribute;
partial exports are not allowed.

> [!NOTE]
>
> We should define `AnyValue` limits even if this OTEP is not merged -
> [#4487](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4487)

### Exporters

OTLP exporter SHOULD, by default, pass `AnyValue` attributes to the endpoint.

Exporters for protocols that do not natively support complex values, such as Prometheus,
SHOULD represent complex values as JSON-encoded strings following
[attribute specification](/specification/common/README.md#attribute).

When serializing `AnyValue` attributes to JSON, it is RECOMMENDED to sort map keys
lexicographically and apply additional settings that enhance serialization stability.

### Semantic conventions

Semantic conventions will be updated with the following guidance:

- Simple attributes SHOULD be used whenever possible. Semantic conventions SHOULD
  assume that backends do not index individual properties of complex attributes,
  that querying or aggregating on such properties is inefficient and complicated,
  and that reporting complex attributes carries higher performance overhead.

- Complex attributes that are likely to be large (when serialized to a string) SHOULD
  be added as *opt-in* attributes. *Large* will be defined based on common backend
  attribute limits, typically around 4–16 KB.

- Complex attributes MUST NOT be used on metrics, resources, instrumentation scopes,
  or as identifying attributes on entities.

### Proto

OTLP uses `AnyValue` attributes on all signals, so the changes would be limited
to updating comments like [this one](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/be5d58470429d0255ffdd49491f0815a3a63d6ef/opentelemetry/proto/trace/v1/trace.proto#L209-L213)
and adding changelog record.

## Trade-offs and mitigations

### Backends don't support `AnyValue` attributes

While it should be possible to record complex data in telemetry, many backends do not
support it, which can result in individual complex attributes being dropped.

We mitigate this through:

- Introducing new APIs in the experimental parts of the OTel API which will limit
  the impact of unsupported attribute types to early adopters, while giving
  backends time to add support.

- Semantic conventions guidance that limits usage of complex attributes.

- Existing collector transformation processor that can drop, flatten, serialize,
  or truncate complex attributes using OTTL.

### Arbitrary objects are dangerous

Allowing arbitrary objects as attributes is convenient but increases the risk of
including large, sensitive, mutable, non-serializable, or otherwise problematic
data in telemetry.

It is RECOMMENDED to enforce `AnyValue` compatibility at the API level.
Users and instrumentations SHOULD define custom `AnyValue`-compatible models
to minimize misuse and reduce performance overhead.

OTel SDKs that provide convenience to convert arbitrary objects to `AnyValue`
SHOULD limit supported types to primitives, arrays, standard library collections,
named tuples, JSON objects, and similar structures following
[mapping to OTLP AnyValue](/specification/common/attribute-type-mapping.md#mapping-arbitrary-data-to-otlp-anyvalue).

Falling back to a string representation of unknown objects is RECOMMENDED to
minimize the risk of unintentional use of complex attributes.

Prior art on AnyValue conversion: [Go](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/blob/72cccd8065dcfd84b69f34d8cb6f349a547fedce/bridges/otelslog/convert.go#L20),
[.NET](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/71abd4169b4b6c672343b37c32e3337bc227ed32/src/OpenTelemetry/Logs/ILogger/OpenTelemetryLogger.cs#L134),
[Python](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python/blob/00329e07fb01d7c3e43bb513fe9be3748745c52e/opentelemetry-api/src/opentelemetry/attributes/__init__.py#L121)

## Prototypes

TODO

## Future possibilities

### Configurable OTLP exporter behavior

The OTLP exporter behavior for complex attributes can be made customizable on a per-signal
basis, allowing complex attributes to be:

- passed through (the default),
- serialized to JSON, or
- dropped

This option may be useful as a workaround for applications that don’t use a
collector and whose backend does not handle complex attribute types gracefully.

### Additional size limits

We can consider a separate set of attribute limits specifically for complex values,
including a total size limit and ability to estimate `AnyValue` object size.

## Backend research

See [the gist](https://gist.github.com/lmolkova/737ebba190b206a5d60bbc075fea538b)
for additional details.

| Backend                           | Handles complex attributes gracefully? | Comments        |
| --------------------------------- | ------------------------| ------------------------------ |
| Jaeger (OTLP)                     | :white_check_mark:      | serializes to JSON string |
| Prometheus with OTLP remote write | :white_check_mark:      | serializes to JSON string |
| Grafana Tempo (OTLP)              | :white_check_mark:      | serializes to JSON string, viewable but can't query using this attribute |
| Grafana Loki (OTLP)               | :white_check_mark:      | flattens |
| Aspire dashboard (OTLP)           | :white_check_mark:      | serializes to JSON string |
| ClickHouse (collector exporter)   | :white_check_mark:      | serializes to JSON string, can parse JSON and query |
| Honeycomb (OTLP)                  | :white_check_mark:      | flattens if less than 5 layers deep, not array or binary data, JSON string otherwise |
| New Relic (OTLP)                  | :x: (fix is on the way) | drops spans | |
