specification/metrics/sdk_exporters/prometheus.md, before:

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Prometheus
--->

# Metrics Exporter - Prometheus

**Status**: [Experimental](../../document-status.md)

A Prometheus Exporter is a [Pull Metric Exporter](../sdk.md#pull-metric-exporter)
which reports metrics by responding to the [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/)
scraper requests.

A Prometheus Exporter MUST support [Pull mode](../sdk.md#pull-metric-exporter).

A Prometheus Exporter MUST NOT support [Push
mode](../sdk.md#push-metric-exporter).

A Prometheus Exporter MUST only support [Cumulative
Temporality](../data-model.md#temporality).

A Prometheus Exporter MUST support version `0.0.4` of the [Text-based
format](https://github.com/prometheus/docs/blob/main/content/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats.md#text-based-format).

A Prometheus Exporter MAY support [OpenMetrics Text
Format](https://github.com/prometheus/docs/blob/main/content/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats.md#openmetrics-text-format),
including the
[Exemplars](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#exemplars).

A Prometheus Exporter MAY offer configuration to add resource attributes as metric attributes.
By default, it MUST NOT add any resource attributes as metric attributes.
The configuration SHOULD allow the user to select which resource attributes to copy (e.g.
include / exclude or regular expression based). Copied Resource attributes MUST NOT be
excluded from target_info.

A Prometheus Exporter MAY support a configuration option to produce metrics without a [unit suffix](../../compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md#metric-metadata)
or UNIT metadata. The option MAY be named `without_units`, and MUST be `false` by default.

A Prometheus Exporter MAY support a configuration option to produce metrics without a [type suffix](../../compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md#metric-metadata).
The option MAY be named `without_type_suffix`, and MUST be `false` by default.

A Prometheus Exporter MAY support a configuration option to produce metrics without a [scope info](../../compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md#instrumentation-scope)
metric. The option MAY be named `without_scope_info`, and MUST be `false` by default.

Commit message:

update prometheus SDK exporter specification, and remove SDK-specific language from compatibility specification

specification/metrics/sdk_exporters/prometheus.md, after:

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Prometheus
--->

# Metrics Exporter - Prometheus

**Status**: [Experimental](../../document-status.md)

A Prometheus Exporter MUST be a [Pull Metric Exporter](../sdk.md#pull-metric-exporter)
which responds to HTTP requests with Prometheus metrics in the appropriate format.

OpenTelemetry metrics MUST be converted to Prometheus metrics according to the
[Prometheus Compatibility specification](../../compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md).

A Prometheus Exporter SHOULD use
[Prometheus client libraries](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/clientlibs/)
for serving Prometheus metrics, including negotiating the
[format](https://github.com/prometheus/docs/blob/main/content/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats.md#openmetrics-text-format)
of the response using the Content-Type header. Regardless of whether a
Prometheus client libary is used, the Prometheus Exporter MUST support version
`0.0.4` of the [Text-based format](https://github.com/prometheus/docs/blob/main/content/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats.md#text-based-format).
A Prometheus Exporter MAY support Exemplars and Exponential Histograms,
which are [not currently supported by the Prometheus text format](../../compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md#differences-between-prometheus-formats),
by supporting other Prococols, but is not required to implement them.

A Prometheus Exporter for an OpenTelemetry metrics SDK MUST NOT use
[Prometheus Remote Write format](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/main/prompb/remote.proto)
or [OpenMetrics protobuf format](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#protobuf-format).

A Prometheus Expoerter for an OpenTelemetry metrics SDK MUST NOT add
[explicit timestamps on Metric points](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#metric).

There MUST be at most one `target` info metric exposed by an SDK
Prometheus exporter.

## Configuration

A Prometheus Exporter MAY offer configuration to add resource attributes as metric attributes.
By default, it MUST NOT add any resource attributes as metric attributes.
The configuration SHOULD allow the user to select which resource attributes to copy (e.g.
include / exclude or regular expression based). Copied Resource attributes MUST NOT be
excluded from the `target` info metric.

A Prometheus Exporter MAY support a configuration option to produce metrics without a [unit suffix](../../compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md#metric-metadata)
or UNIT metadata. The option MAY be named `without_units`, and MUST be `false` by default.

A Prometheus Exporter MAY support a configuration option to produce metrics without a [type suffix](../../compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md#metric-metadata).
The option MAY be named `without_type_suffix`, and MUST be `false` by default.

A Prometheus Exporter MAY support a configuration option to produce metrics without a [scope info](../../compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md#instrumentation-scope-1)
metric, or scope labels. The option MAY be named `without_scope_info`, and MUST be `false` by default.

A Prometheus Exporter MAY support a configuration option to produce metrics without a [target info](../../compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md#resource-attributes-1)
metric. The option MAY be named `without_target_info`, and MUST be `false` by default.
