specification/resource/data-model.md, before:

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Data Model
weight: 2
--->

# Resource Data Model

**Status**: [Development](../document-status.md)

<details>
<summary>Table of Contents</summary>

<!-- toc -->

- [Identity](#identity)

<!-- tocstop -->

</details>

A Resource is a representation of the entity producing telemetry as Attributes.
For example, You could have a process producing telemetry that is
running in a container on Kubernetes, which is associated to a Pod running on a
Node that is a VM but also is in a namespace and possibly is part of a
Deployment. Resource could have attributes to denote information about the
Container, the Pod, the Node, the VM or the Deployment. All of these help
identify what produced the telemetry. Note that there are certain attributes
that have prescribed meanings.

A resource is composed of 0 or more [`Entities`](../entities/README.md) and 0
or more attributes not associated with any entity.

The data model below defines a logical model for an Resource (irrespective of the physical format and encoding of how resource data is recorded).

| Field | Type | Description |
| ----- | ---- | ----------- |
| Entities | set\<Entity\> | Defines the set of Entities associated with this resource.<p>[Entity is defined here](../entities/data-model.md) |
| Attributes | map\<string, attribute value\> | Additional Attributes that identify the resource.<p>MUST not change during the lifetime of the resource.<p>Follows OpenTelemetry [attribute definition](../common/README.md#attribute). |

## Identity

Most resources are a composition of [`Entity`](../entities/data-model.md).
Entity includes its own notion of identity. The identity of a resource is
the set of entities contained within it. Two resources are considered
different if one contains an entity not found in the other.

Some resources include raw attributes in addition to Entities. Raw attributes are
considered identifying on a resource. That is, if the key-value pairs of
raw attributes are different, then you can assume the resource is different.

Commit message:

docs: clarify resource describes observed entity, not telemetry emitter
Disambiguates the Resource definition to account for auto-instrumentation
scenarios (e.g., eBPF agents) where the technical producer of telemetry
differs from the entity being observed.

- specification/resource/README.md: reframe definition as "entity for
  which telemetry is being produced"; add NOTE callout explaining that
  Resource MUST describe the observed workload in agent-based
  instrumentation, with guidance on telemetry.sdk.name / telemetry.distro.name
- specification/resource/data-model.md: align definition language;
  explicitly note the observed entity vs. emitter distinction
- specification/resource/sdk.md: same alignment for the SDK spec
- specification/logs/data-model.md: update table description from
  "source of the log" to "observed entity that generated the log"

specification/resource/data-model.md, after:

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Data Model
weight: 2
--->

# Resource Data Model

**Status**: [Development](../document-status.md)

<details>
<summary>Table of Contents</summary>

<!-- toc -->

- [Identity](#identity)

<!-- tocstop -->

</details>

A Resource represents the observed entity for which telemetry is produced.
It is defined by a set of Attributes that identify the source of the telemetry,
rather than the component that technically produces it (like an
auto-instrumentation agent).
For example, a process running in a container on Kubernetes is associated to a
Pod running on a Node that is a VM, in a namespace, and possibly part of a
Deployment. Resource could have attributes to denote information about the
Container, the Pod, the Node, the VM or the Deployment. All of these help
identify the observed entity. Note that there are certain attributes
that have prescribed meanings.

A resource is composed of 0 or more [`Entities`](../entities/README.md) and 0
or more attributes not associated with any entity.

The data model below defines a logical model for an Resource (irrespective of the physical format and encoding of how resource data is recorded).

| Field | Type | Description |
| ----- | ---- | ----------- |
| Entities | set\<Entity\> | Defines the set of Entities associated with this resource.<p>[Entity is defined here](../entities/data-model.md) |
| Attributes | map\<string, attribute value\> | Additional Attributes that identify the resource.<p>MUST not change during the lifetime of the resource.<p>Follows OpenTelemetry [attribute definition](../common/README.md#attribute). |

## Identity

Most resources are a composition of [`Entity`](../entities/data-model.md).
Entity includes its own notion of identity. The identity of a resource is
the set of entities contained within it. Two resources are considered
different if one contains an entity not found in the other.

Some resources include raw attributes in addition to Entities. Raw attributes are
considered identifying on a resource. That is, if the key-value pairs of
raw attributes are different, then you can assume the resource is different.
